doc/dev: Add internal documentation for mclock scheduler (#40725)
ceph/ceph: doc/dev/osd_internals/mclock_wpq_cmp_study.rst

=========================================
 QoS Study with mClock and WPQ Schedulers
=========================================

> 

Reviewer: could use an intro to what qos / mclock is intended to do at a high level, maybe referencing the existing docs for this background

Author: Done. Please verify.

Author: Have added an "Introduction" section and referenced the appropriate documentation including the mClock paper.

Ceph's use of mClock was primarily experimental and approached with an
exploratory mindset. This is still true with other organizations and individuals
who continue to either use the codebase or modify it according to their needs.

DmClock exists in its own repository_. Before the Ceph *Pacific* release,
mClock could be enabled by setting the ``osd_op_queue`` Ceph option to
*mclock_scheduler*. Additional mClock parameters like *reservation*, *weight*
and *limit* for each service type could be set using Ceph options.
For example, ``osd_mclock_scheduler_client_[res,wgt,lim]`` is one such option.

> See `OSD Config Reference`_ section for more details. Even with all the mClock

Reviewer 2: better off using
```rst
:ref:`dmclock-qos`
```

the relative link is fragile.

Author: Sure, I will push this in my next update.

  - average throughput(IOPS),
  - average and percentile(95th, 99th, 99.5th) latency,

- background recovery

  - average recovery throughput,
  - number of misplaced objects recovered per second

Test Environment
================

1. **Software Configuration**: CentOS 8.1.1911 Linux Kernel 4.18.0-193.6.3.el8_2.x86_64
2. **CPU**: 2 x Intel® Xeon® CPU E5-2650 v3 @ 2.30GHz
3. **nproc**: 40
4. **System Memory**: 64 GiB
5. **Tuned-adm Profile**: network-latency
6. **CephVer**: 17.0.0-2125-g94f550a87f (94f550a87fcbda799afe9f85e40386e6d90b232e) quincy (dev)
7. **Storage**:

  - Intel® NVMe SSD DC P3700 Series (SSDPE2MD800G4) [4 x 800GB]
  - Seagate Constellation 7200 RPM 64MB Cache SATA 6.0Gb/s HDD (ST91000640NS) [4 x 1TB]

Test Methodology
================

Ceph cbt_ was used to test the recovery scenarios. A new recovery test to
generate background recoveries with client I/Os in parallel was created.
See the next section for the detailed test steps. The test was executed 3 times
with the default *Weighted Priority Queue (WPQ)* scheduler for comparison
purposes. This was done to establish a credible mean value to compare
the mClock scheduler results at a later point.

> Post this, the same test was executed with mClock scheduler and with different

Reviewer: nit: 'after' is more conventional than 'post' as a preposition in american english

Author: Ack. I have changed it.

+========================+=============+========+=======+
| client                 | 30%         | 1      | 80%   |
+------------------------+-------------+--------+-------+
| background recovery    | 60%         | 2      | 200%  |
+------------------------+-------------+--------+-------+
| background best effort | 1 (MIN)     | 1      | MAX   |
+------------------------+-------------+--------+-------+

custom
```````

The custom profile allows the user to have complete control of the mClock
and Ceph config parameters. To use this profile, the user must have a deep
understanding of the workings of Ceph and the mClock scheduler. All the
*reservation*, *weight* and *limit* parameters of the different service types
must be set manually along with any Ceph option(s). This profile may be used
for experimental and exploratory purposes or if the built-in profiles do not
meet the requirements. In such cases, adequate testing must be performed prior
to enabling this profile.

Recovery Test Steps
===================

Before bringing up the Ceph cluster, the following mClock configuration
parameters were set appropriately based on the obtained baseline throughput
from the previous section:

> - ``osd_mclock_max_capacity_iops_hdd``

Reviewer 2: nit, better off referencing these settings using 
```rst
:confval:`osd_mclock_max_capacity_iops_hdd`
```

Author: @tchaikov Sure, I will change it here and in other places.

default values. The default setting for ``osd_max_backfills`` limits the number
of concurrent local and remote backfills or recoveries per OSD to 1. As a
result, the average client throughput obtained is impressive at just over 18000
IOPS when compared to the baseline value which is 21500 IOPS.

However, with WPQ scheduler along with non-default options mentioned in section
`Non-Default Ceph Recovery Options`_, things are quite different as shown in the
chart for WPQ(BST). In this case, the average client throughput obtained drops
dramatically to only 2544 IOPS. The non-default recovery options clearly had a
significant impact on the client throughput. In other words, recovery operations
overwhelm the client operations. Sections further below discuss the recovery
rates under these conditions.

With the non-default options, the same test was executed with mClock and with
the default profile(*high_client_ops*) enabled. As per the profile allocation,
the reservation goal of 50% (10750 IOPS) is being met with an average throughput
of 11209 IOPS during the course of recovery operations. This is more than 4x
times the throughput obtained with WPQ(BST).

> Similar throughput with the *balanced*(11017 IOPS) and *high_recovery_ops*

Reviewer: I think you need a space before the ( - it's throwing off the formatting in the rendered version

Author: Fixed. Thanks for pointing this out.

under a very restrictive environment where the OSD capacity is at the lower end.
The sections and charts below are very similar to the ones presented above and
are provided here for reference.

Client Throughput & latency Comparison
--------------------------------------

The average client throughput, latency and percentiles are compared as before
in the set of charts shown below.

.. image:: ../../images/mclock_wpq_study/Avg_Client_Throughput_HDD_NoWALdB_WPQ_vs_mClock.png

.. image:: ../../images/mclock_wpq_study/Avg_Client_Latency_Percentiles_HDD_NoWALdB_WPQ_vs_mClock.png

.. image:: ../../images/mclock_wpq_study/Clat_Latency_Comparison_HDD_NoWALdB_WPQ_vs_mClock.png

Recovery Statistics Comparison
------------------------------

The recovery rates and times are shown in the charts below.

.. image:: ../../images/mclock_wpq_study/Avg_Obj_Rec_Throughput_HDD_NoWALdB_WPQ_vs_mClock.png

.. image:: ../../images/mclock_wpq_study/Recovery_Rate_Comparison_HDD_NoWALdB_WPQ_vs_mClock.png

Key Takeaways and Conclusion
============================

- mClock is able to provide the desired QoS using profiles to allocate proper
  *reservation*, *weight* and *limit* to the service types.

> - By using the cost per I/O and the cost per byte parameters, mClock can perform
>   the tag calculations for the different device types(SSD/HDD).

Reviewer: tags aren't really a focus of this doc, so it's confusing to mention them when the reader may not be familiar with the mclock algorithm

```suggestion
- By using the cost per I/O and the cost per byte parameters, mClock can schedule operations appropriately for the different device types(SSD/HDD).
```

Author: I have changed it according you suggestion. I have removed the mention of tags in other places as well.
